hi everyone thanks for joining me this
video will discuss psychodynamic
treatment approaches for pathological
narcissism briefly reviewing theoretical
underpinnings currently favored
approaches that extend from those
theoretical concepts and providing some
general guidelines for anyone working
with narcissistic patients regardless of
the model that they're using
so let's get started
pathological narcissism can be
conceptualized as difficulty maintaining
a positive realistic self-image
it's often accompanied by interpersonal
issues feelings of emptiness and
deficits and effective coping when
threats to self-esteem are encountered
pathological narcissism is often
associated with positive or negative
exaggerations and self-perception the
tendency to idealize or devalue the self
and others depression anxiety substance
abuse and even suicide
in its most severe form pathological
narcissism manifests as narcissistic
personality disorder or npd
for the first half of the 20th century
it was widely believed among clinicians
that narcissism could not be effectively
treated using available techniques this
is a myth that persists to this very day
in the public mind
and this is mainly due to outdated
psychoanalytic conceptualizations of the
disorder at the time it was believed
that narcissists could not form
object-related transferences in
treatment
meaning that they did not relate to the
clinician as though she or he were
another person from the patient's past
instead it was recognized that
narcissistic patients would form
narcissistic transferences in which they
would project an aspect of their own
experience onto the clinician since
early psychoanalytic methods focused on
working with object-related
transferences and not narcissistic
transferences
it was thought that narcissists couldn't
be treated in the latter half of the
20th century new developments in theory
and technique caused clinicians to begin
viewing narcissism in a different light
two prominent theorists focused on
developing new ways to treat the
disorder
the first
otto kernberg
worked from a perspective called object
relations
object relations focuses on how we
unconsciously perceive and relate to
other people
kernberg developed a theory of
narcissism that emphasizes internal
conflicts between emotional needs and
early frustrations
in his model
develop a pathological self that
contains deep fissures between authentic
needs and feelings idealized images of
self and others and overwhelming
feelings of envy and aggression
he developed a technique that confronts
the grandiose self of narcissistic
patients by focusing on the ways that
narcissists project unwanted thoughts
and feelings onto
and into those around them kernberg's
approach focuses on strict boundaries in
the therapy relationship
he believes that toxic aggression is at
the heart of pathological narcissism and
that it must be consistently confronted
and exposed in order for the grandiose
self to begin to relinquish its
dependency on narcissistic defenses
in contrast to kernberg
heinz kohut took a more empathetic
approach to conceptualizing and treating
narcissism
his work resulted in the development of
self-psychology
kohut identified early unmet emotional
and developmental needs that seemed to
dominate his work with narcissistic
patients
he identified a unique form of
transference called self-object
transference
in which narcissists relate to others in
a way that is designed to shore up or
buffer their own fragile self-esteem
like kernberg kohut believed that
narcissists have a fundamental confusion
between self and other
but unlike kernberg he felt that unmet
needs were at the heart of pathological
narcissism not toxic aggression
kernberg's is a conflict model whereas
kohutz is a deficit model
he focused on providing the right type
of environment in treatment for the
narcissist's underdeveloped self to grow
stronger
believing that a stronger self would
result in less fragmentation an
experience where the self seems to fall
apart and that often leads to depression
overwhelming anxiety and even suicide
kohut's method used empathy and a
concept called temporary indwelling in
which he would attempt to understand the
narcissist's inner world as though it
were his own
he would then mirror that understanding
back to the patient over time building
up feelings of safety and understanding
that the patient could rely on to keep
from fragmenting
this process was termed transmuting
internalization
in recent years researchers have begun
to realize that the theories of kernberg
and kohut may have both been correct in
some ways
but were also incomplete in others
in my perspective the best way to
conceptualize pathological narcissism is
as a series of maladaptive defenses
kernberg
built on top of fundamental relational
and developmental deficits
kohut
the deficits create a fragile self-image
that is prone to breakdown collapse or
fragmentation
while the defenses built on top create a
grandiose false self-experience that
relies on idealization entitlement and
projective defenses to keep the
underlying fragile self-image from
collapse
in other words kohut's model explains
vulnerable narcissism well
while kernberg's model addresses the
grandiose presentation
treatment principles flow naturally from
this recognition
in a vulnerable state narcissistic
patients benefit from a primarily
empathic and containing approach that
emphasizes positive mirroring
an important principle is to validate
without gratifying that means the
clinician should recognize that the
patient's striving for admiration and
validation comes from a deep place of
developmental need and that simply
giving the patient what she or he is
asking for will only keep them stuck in
the same maladaptive patterns
instead
the clinician should mirror the desire
from admiration without necessarily
handing it over
this allows the patient to slowly over
time become increasingly aware of the
underlying deficits in the self and the
vulnerabilities they produce while
simultaneously providing the experience
of being seen and cared about for who
they are
rather than for who they feel they need
to be
in a grandiose state narcissistic
patients require a more boundaried
approach that emphasizes gently
confronting the grandiose projections
and entitlements while still holding the
basic goodness of the underlying
vulnerable self
this approach requires a delicate
balancing act because grandiose
narcissistic patients often remain very
sensitive to feeling slighted criticized
or humiliated and are more likely to
react to such feelings with anger or
devaluation of the clinician
the clinician must be prepared to
tolerate such projections while
maintaining a firm sense of the
clinician's own worth
several approaches have attempted to
concentrate or manualize these
principles the first is
transference-focused psychotherapy or
tfp
developed by otto kernberg himself
tfp is a formal distillation of the
principles of his work
it consists of systematically pointing
out and confronting maladaptive
transference patterns in the therapy
and highlighting inconsistencies in the
patient's perceptions of self and others
something he believes is necessary to
help the patient form an integrated
sense of self the drawbacks are that it
can be difficult to find a trained
practitioner
and that the experience can be quite
intensive requiring the patient to
submit to a frequent meeting schedule
and agree to a very structured and at
times confrontational methodology
mentalization based treatment or mbt is
a competing manualized approach that
focuses on helping the patient to
mentalize that is to develop increased
abilities to understand their own
thoughts
and the thoughts and feelings of other
people
the ability to mentalize is seen as a
sort of buffer
a space in between thoughts feelings and
behaviors where we can watch and catch
ourselves before doing something harmful
or destructive
young children do not have this ability
they must be taught how to mentalize
through consistent empathically attuned
interactions with caregivers
mbt
borrows from attachment theory
it also employs a number of principles
developed by heinz kohut in that it
emphasizes feeling misunderstood as a
form of relational trauma that
interferes with emotional development
mbt is not confrontational
among other things the clinician tries
to monitor the level of emotional
escalation in the patient at all times
always keeping things in a productive
zone where emotional growth and insight
are possible
in my opinion
manualized approaches are valuable for
the purposes of research
we need clinicians who are trained to
provide a consistent series of
interventions in order to evaluate the
effectiveness of those techniques
but usefulness to research and
usefulness to practice are two different
things
the fact of the matter is a good
therapist will employ aspects of tfp mbt
self-psychology and a number of other
approaches as needed and this
perspective aligns well with a recent
peer-reviewed article in the journal of
personality disorders entitled
principles of psychodynamic treatment
for patients with narcissistic
personality disorder
the authors recognize that there is no
gold standard approach for treating npd
instead they recommend that clinicians
take a flexible and individually
oriented approach to each narcissistic
patient
recognizing that every presentation of
the disorder is different
for some patients a firm and somewhat
confrontational approach is required in
order to help them work through highly
problematic grandiose defenses while for
others they recommend a witnessing
approach
that emphasizes emotional holding
mirroring and validation
without gratifying the pathological need
for admiration
for any patient suffering from npd
treatment will follow a long-term
trajectory
here are some general guidelines for
therapists working with narcissistic
patients
first expect to experience lots of
pushes and pulls over the course of the
treatment
this is true for any personality
disorder but given the variability of
narcissistic presentations in therapy
clinicians should expect the unexpected
when it comes to working with
narcissists
narcissistic patients often project
unwanted aspects of their own
self-experience onto and into those
around them
clinicians may be required to tolerate
feeling worthless devalued ineffective
or even invisible
they should recognize
that these are the patients own
disavowed feelings
that the patient is managing by causing
the clinician to feel them instead
conversely clinicians may at times be
required to hold feelings of being
idealized
they may feel smart powerful even
infallible
unprepared or uninsightful clinicians
will identify with these experiences
instead of recognizing them as aspects
of the narcissistic patient's own
unconscious struggles with grandiosity
versus inferiority
second
work with narcissistic patients is
challenging to the clinician's own
narcissistic vulnerabilities
in the face of feeling devalued
ineffective or invisible clinicians may
unwittingly strike back in subtle or
even overt ways
falling into cycles of enactments that
erode the therapeutic alliance and
confirm the patient's unconscious belief
that even trusted figures will
eventually attack or humiliate them
the clinician's task is to tolerate and
metabolize these aspects of the
narcissist's disavowed self-experience
slowly and gradually feeding them back
to the patient in a modified form that
promotes healing and growth instead of
recapitulating problematic relationship
patterns
third
clinicians should be wary of taking too
aggressive or too passive a stance
the aggressive stance will only inflame
patients in a grandiose state and will
overwhelm patients in a vulnerable state
while a passive stance colludes with
grandiose strivings to dominate the
relationship in order to shut out
possibilities of feeling shame or
humiliation
at the same time such a stance will
leave vulnerable patients feeling like
maybe there's nobody there at all
instead
aim for a flexible approach that
maintains important boundaries
challenges when necessary
and perhaps most importantly prioritizes
the patient's experience at all times
finally
clinicians should not underestimate the
importance of witnessing
narcissistic patients often feel
invisible regardless of how much
emotional space they are occupying
this was kohut's main insight
the wounded self of narcissistic
patients
is in danger of disintegrating
the experience of being consistently
seen and empathically understood is the
best medicine for this condition
be cautious about responding to poles in
therapy to
do something
often
simply listening and reflecting is what
the patient needs and is actually
seeking
thanks for joining me don't forget to
leave comments and questions and to hit
the subscribe button if you'd like to be
notified about future videos i make on
the topic of narcissism
you can also visit my website at
www.dreatonson.com
and find lots more information about
narcissism from a compassionate and
non-stigmatizing perspective in my book
entitled unmasking narcissism a guide to
understanding the narcissist in your
life
there's a link in the description if
you're interested
take care
you